=== Page 1 ===
New Identify evidence gaps in your manuscript
Double-check your claims with LeapSpace's Writing Coach.
Try Writing Coach
Guide for authors
About the journal
Aims and scope
Article types
Peer review
Open access
Ethics and policies
Ethics in publishing
Submission declaration
Authorship
Changes to authorship
Declaration of competing interests
Funding sources
Declaration of generative AI use
Preprints
Use of inclusive language
Reporting sex- and gender-based analyses
Image manipulation
Jurisdictional claims
Delayed publication
Withdrawal, correction, or retraction
Writing and formatting
File format
Title page
Abstract
Keywords
Highlights
Graphical abstract
Tables
Figures, images and other artwork
Generative AI and ﬁgures, images and other artwork
Supplementary material
Video
Research data
Data statement
Data linking
Mendeley data
Journal of Hazardous Materials
Supports open access
=== Page 2 ===
Co-submission of related data, methods or protocols
Article structure
References
Submitting your manuscript
Submission checklist
Submit online
After receiving a ﬁnal decision
Article Transfer Service
Publishing agreement
License options
Open access
Permission for copyrighted works
Proof correction
Responsible sharing
Journal speciﬁc information
Resources for authors
Elsevier Researcher Academy
Language and editing services
Getting help and support
Author support
About the journal
Aims and scope
The Journal of Hazardous Materials is an international forum that advances world class research by publishing articles in the areas of
Environmental Science and Engineering. We publish full-length research papers, review articles, and perspectives that improve our
understanding of the hazards and risks that certain materials pose to public health and the environment. Authors are supposed to address
two questions in their manuscripts: 1) is the studied subject an environmental contaminant? and 2) is the study conducted under an
environmentally relevant condition?
"Environmental contaminants" exclude the compounds that do not exert hazardous eﬀects on the environment or humans via contamination.
Of note, diﬀerence between wastes and hazardous materials needs to be spotlighted to further clarify the JHM scope. The journal is highly
interested in speciﬁc compounds or microbial agents with environmentally hazardous eﬀects.
"Environmentally relevant conditions" typically require an experiment or modeling study to be conducted with the consideration of
environmental factors, such as temperature, pH, environmental matrix constituents, and chemical doses for waste removal, within their
respective realistic occurrence ranges. Particularly, we have noticed that studies on nanomaterials or emerging contaminants (e.g.,
sensing/detection, eﬀects, and removal) in many manuscripts were performed with unrealistically high concentrations, which can be several
orders of magnitude higher than their real occurrence ranges in an environmental medium.
Environmental implications from such studies would be very limited. Although higher concentrations may exhibit a full spectrum of
hazardous eﬀects, a manuscript ought to embrace realistic level(s) of a hazardous material in the range of the studied concentrations.
Examples of the topics that are outside the journal's scope can be found in this editorial: Reﬁning the scope of Journal of Hazardous Materials
Article types
Full-length research papers within the above stated Aims and Scope are welcome. Such contributions are not to be submitted in two parts (i.e.
Part I and Part II) - these must be consolidated into one manuscript. Short communications are not considered.
=== Page 3 ===
Review Article - Critical evaluation of existing data, deﬁned topics or emerging ﬁelds of investigation, critical issues of public concern.For
Review Articles please include the following in your Cover Letter: (1) a clear indication of the novelty and urgency of such a review paper at this
time, in light of other review a brief on the same topic, (2) a brief description of the authors' academic background and research areas, and (3)
a list of all authors' publications related to the review article topic.
Perspectives allow experienced researchers the opportunity to provide their view, opinions, and outlook on selected subjects. Those analyses
and discussions should be based on solid research proof and data from authors and/or literature. Pure speculations or opinions are excluded.
Letter to the Editor - A written discussion of papers published in the journal. Authors of earlier papers, if the Letter concerns a prior
publication, will also be given an opportunity to respond.
Virtual Special Issue - If you would like to propose a virtual special issue, please contact the managing editor via
email:hazmat@elsevier.com. A required template must be completed for all proposals for virtual special issues. The key factors for a
successful proposal include the strong need for such a special issue, extensive publication/editorial records of guest editors, and a viable plan
for attracting high-quality papers.
Peer review
This journal follows a single anonymized review process. Your submission will initially be assessed by our editors. If your submission is deemed
suitable, it will typically be sent to be reviewed by a minimum of two reviewers for an independent expert assessment of the scientiﬁc quality.
The decision as to whether your article is accepted or rejected for publication will be made by our editors.
Read more about peer review.
Our editors are not involved in making decisions about papers which:
they have written themselves.
have been written by family members or colleagues.
relate to products or services in which they have an interest.
Any such submissions will be subject to the journal's usual procedures and peer review will be handled independently of the editor involved
and their research group. Read more about editor duties.
Authors may submit a formal appeal request to the editorial decision, provided it meets all the requirements and follows the procedure
outlined in Elsevier’s Appeal Policy. Only one appeal per submission will be considered and the appeal decision will be ﬁnal.
Special issues and article collections
The peer review process for special issues and article collections follows the same process as outlined above for regular submissions, except, a
guest editor may send the submissions out to the reviewers and may recommend a decision to the journal editor. The journal editor oversees
the peer review process of all special issues and article collections to ensure the high standards of publishing ethics and responsiveness are
respected and is responsible for the ﬁnal decision regarding acceptance or rejection of articles.
Open access
We refer you to our open access information page to learn about open access options for this journal.
Ethics and policies
Ethics in publishing
Authors must follow ethical guidelines stated in Elsevier's Publishing Ethics Policy.
Submission declaration
When authors submit an article to an Elsevier journal it is implied that:
=== Page 4 ===
The work described has not been published previously except in the form of a preprint, an abstract, a published lecture, academic thesis
or registered report. See our policy on multiple, redundant or concurrent publication.
The article is not under consideration for publication elsewhere.
The article's publication is approved by all authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was carried out.
If accepted, the article will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or in any other language, including electronically,
without the written consent of the copyright-holder.
To verify compliance with our journal publishing policies, we may check your manuscript with our screening tools.
Authorship
All authors should have made substantial contributions to all of the following:
1. The conception and design of the study, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data
2. Drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content.
3. Final approval of the version to be submitted.
All authors are accountable for all aspects of the work, to ensure that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are
appropriately investigated and resolved.
Corresponding author
Authors must appoint a single corresponding author to communicate with the journal during the editorial process. This individual submits the
manuscript and all required documentation to the journal, and serves as the primary contact between the journal and the co-authors. It is
important that all contact details of the corresponding author are kept up to date throughout the submission and publication process.
Only the corresponding author’s aﬃliation will be used to determine eligibility for a publishing agreement, and possible discounts related to
it. Aﬃliations of other co-authors are not relevant for eligibility.
Group authorship
Group authorship refers to the attribution of an article to a deﬁned and named group of authors whose members have contributed to the
work. Examples include research consortia, clinical trial groups, collaborative networks, task forces or working groups, expert panels or
consensus groups, and participatory research groups.
Group authorship must be declared on the title page at submission. When available, the submitting author should include the group under
“Collaborative Author Groups” in the submission system.
A corresponding author who agrees to coordinate all communications on behalf of the group must be designated.
The group name will be included in the author list in the published article (e.g., “on behalf of the [Consortium Name]”).
All group members associated with the work should be listed in a dedicated section, preferably an appendix.
All listed authors must follow the journal’s authorship and authorship change policies.
The group must maintain a transparent internal process for determining authorship and resolving disputes. All authorship disputes must
be resolved within the group.
Changes to authorship
The editors of this journal generally will not consider changes to authorship once a manuscript has been submitted. It is important that
authors carefully consider the authorship list and order of authors and provide a deﬁnitive author list at submission.  
=== Page 5 ===
The policy of this journal around authorship changes:  
All authors must be listed in the manuscript and their details entered into the submission system. Changes can only be made prior to
acceptance, and only if approved by the journal editor. This includes additions, deletion, or rearrangement of author names.
Requests to change authorship must be made by the corresponding author using the Authorship Change Request form. The corresponding
author must provide the reason for the request to the journal editor with written conﬁrmation from all authors, including any authors
being added or removed, that they agree with the changes. Requests which do not comply with the instructions outlined in the form will
not be considered.
This journal does not allow authorship changes after acceptance. This includes additions, deletions, or the rearrangement of author
names, including changes to the corresponding author.
The review process may be paused while a change in authorship request is being considered.
Change requests made by the authors without the Authorship Change Request form or editor approval may result in the rejection of the
manuscript, or retraction if the article has already been published.
Declaration of competing interests
All authors must disclose any ﬁnancial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately inﬂuence or
bias their work. Examples of potential competing interests include:
Employment
Consultancies
Stock ownership
Honoraria
Paid expert testimony
Patent applications or registrations
Grants or any other funding
Aﬃliation with the journal as an Editor or Advisory Board Member
The declarations tool should always be completed.
Authors with a journal aﬃliation to declare should enter the following text under “Other Activities” within the  declarations tool and should
inform the journal and publisher prior to completing the submission process:
Given their role as [AUTHOR JOURNAL ROLE TITLE], [AUTHOR NAME] had no involvement in the peer-review of this article and has no access to
information regarding its peer-review. Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated to another journal editor.
Editorial disclosure statements will be included as a footnote and/or in the declaration of competing interest section of the article.
Authors with no competing interests to declare should select the option "I have nothing to declare".
The resulting Word document containing your declaration should be uploaded at the "attach/upload ﬁles" step in the submission process. It is
important that the Word document is saved in the .doc/.docx ﬁle format. Author signatures are not required.
Funding sources