=== Page 1 ===
Authors must disclose any funding sources who provided ﬁnancial support for the conduct of the research and/or preparation of the article.
The role of sponsors, if any, should be declared in relation to the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, writing of the
report and decision to submit the article for publication. If funding sources had no such involvement this should be stated in your submission.
List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy]; the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle,
WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes of Peace [grant number aaaa].
It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants, scholarships and awards. When funding is from a block
grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research institution, submit the name of the institute or organization that
provided the funding.
If no funding has been provided for the research, it is recommended to include the following sentence:
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
Declaration of generative AI use
Authors must declare the use of generative AI tools in the manuscript preparation process upon submission of the paper.
Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies (“AI tools”) have been rapidly adopted in research and scholarly publishing, oﬀering signiﬁcant
beneﬁts while requiring clear standards for responsible and transparent use.
Authors preparing a manuscript for this journal may use AI tools to support them. However, these tools must never be used as a substitute for
human critical thinking, expertise and evaluation. AI tools may only be applied with human oversight and control.
Please read Elsevier’s detailed author policy on the use of AI tools, as stated in Elsevier’s generative AI policies for journals.
Ultimately, authors are responsible and accountable for the contents of their work. This includes accountability for:
Carefully reviewing and verifying the accuracy, comprehensiveness, and impartiality of all AI-generated output (including checking the
sources, as AI-generated references can be incorrect or fabricated).
Editing and adapting all material thoroughly to ensure the manuscript represents the author’s authentic and original contribution and
reﬂects their own analysis, interpretation, insights and ideas.
Ensuring accuracy and originality of any AI generated images and provide appropriate attribution where relevant.
Ensuring the use of any tools or sources, AI-based or otherwise, is made clear and transparent to readers. If AI tools have been used, we
require a disclosure statement upon submission; please see example below.
Ensuring the manuscript is developed in a way that safeguards data privacy, intellectual property and other rights, by checking the terms
and conditions of any AI tool that is used.
Finally, authors must not list or cite AI tools as an author or co-author on the manuscript since authorship implies responsibilities and tasks
that can only be attributed to, and performed by, humans.
The use of AI tools in the manuscript preparation process must be declared by adding a statement at the end of the manuscript when the
paper is ﬁrst submitted. The statement will appear in the published work and should be placed in a new section before the references list. An
example:
Title of new section: Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation process.
Statement: During the preparation of this work the author(s) used [NAME OF TOOL / SERVICE] in order to [REASON]. After using this tool/service,
the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article.
=== Page 2 ===
The declaration does not apply to the use of basic tools, such as tools used to check grammar, spelling and references. In addition, authors
are not required to disclose the use of AI tools or features within specialist disability-related assistive technology, provided these are used
solely for accessibility purposes.
If you have nothing to disclose, you do not need to add a statement.
Please note: to protect authors’ rights and the conﬁdentiality of their research, this journal does not currently allow academic editors and
reviewers to upload an unpublished manuscript into a generative AI tool, as is stated in Elsevier’s generative AI policies for journals. However,
AI tools may be used in a supportive capacity by editors and reviewers to improve structure and language of the review report or editorial
decision letter or to conduct a background literature search. Elsevier is actively evaluating compliant AI tools and may revise this policy in the
future.
Preprints
Preprint sharing
Authors may share preprints in line with Elsevier's article sharing policy. Sharing preprints, such as on a preprint server, will not count as prior
publication.
We advise you to read our policy on multiple, redundant or concurrent publication.
In support of Open Science, this journal oﬀers its authors a free preprint posting service on SSRN, Elsevier’s preprint and early research
repository.
During submission to this journal, you can choose to post your manuscript on SSRN, and it will be made publicly available as soon as it passes
the journal's initial desk review.
As a preprint on SSRN, your manuscript will beneﬁt from:
Early registration with a preprint DOI (Digital Object Identiﬁer)
A link from the preprint to the version of record if published in this journal
Preprint posting, sharing, and download availability that facilitates collaboration and early citations
Your decision to post or not post your preprint will have no eﬀect on the editorial process or publication outcome with the journal. For
additional information, please consult the SSRN Terms of Use and FAQs.
It is expected that the corresponding author will seek approval from all co-authors before agreeing to post the manuscript publicly, prior to
peer review, on SSRN.
Use of inclusive language
Inclusive language acknowledges diversity, conveys respect to all people, is sensitive to diﬀerences, and promotes equal opportunities.
Authors should ensure their work uses inclusive language throughout and contains nothing which might imply one individual is superior to
another on the grounds of:
age
gender
race
ethnicity
culture
sexual orientation
=== Page 3 ===
disability or health condition
We recommend avoiding the use of descriptors about personal attributes unless they are relevant and valid. Write for gender neutrality with
the use of plural nouns ("clinicians, patients/clients") as default. Wherever possible, avoid using "he, she," or "he/she."
No assumptions should be made about the beliefs of readers and writing should be free from bias, stereotypes, slang, reference to dominant
culture and/or cultural assumptions.
These guidelines are meant as a point of reference to help you identify appropriate language but are by no means exhaustive or deﬁnitive.
Reporting sex- and gender-based analyses
There is no single, universally agreed-upon set of guidelines for deﬁning sex and gender. We oﬀer the following guidance:
Sex and gender-based analyses (SGBA) should be integrated into research design when research involves or pertains to humans, animals
or eukaryotic cells. This should be done in accordance with any requirements set by funders or sponsors and best practices within a ﬁeld.
Sex and/or gender dimensions of the research should be addressed within the article or declared as a limitation to the generalizability of
the research.
Deﬁnitions of sex and/or gender applied should be explicitly stated to enhance the precision, rigor and reproducibility of the research and
to avoid ambiguity or conﬂation of terms and the constructs to which they refer.
We advise you to read the Sex and Gender Equity in Research (SAGER) guidelines and the SAGER checklist (PDF) on the EASE website, which
oﬀer systematic approaches to the use of sex and gender information in study design, data analysis, outcome reporting and research
interpretation.
For further information we suggest reading the rationale behind and recommended use of the SAGER guidelines.
Deﬁnitions of sex and/or gender
We ask authors to deﬁne how sex and gender have been used in their research and publication. Some guidance:
Sex generally refers to a set of biological attributes that are associated with physical and physiological features such as chromosomal
genotype, hormonal levels, internal and external anatomy. A binary sex categorization (male/female) is usually designated at birth ("sex
assigned at birth") and is in most cases based solely on the visible external anatomy of a newborn. In reality, sex categorizations include
people who are intersex/have diﬀerences of sex development (DSD).
Gender generally refers to socially constructed roles, behaviors and identities of women, men and gender-diverse people that occur in a
historical and cultural context and may vary across societies and over time. Gender inﬂuences how people view themselves and each
other, how they behave and interact and how power is distributed in society.
Depending on the focus of a paper, sex and/or gender may or may not be relevant to the content of the paper. We recognize that beliefs,
attitudes, and laws relating to sex and gender may vary. These articles do not attempt to dictate author beliefs but rather require that, where
relevant to an author’s research or paper, the author must provide clear explanations of how the paper and research deﬁne and use sex and
gender.
Image manipulation
We accept that authors sometimes need to adjust images for clarity but any manipulation of images for the purpose of deception or fraud will
be seen as scientiﬁc ethical abuse and will be dealt with accordingly.
Authors must adhere to this journal’s policy for graphical images:
No speciﬁc feature within an image may be enhanced, obscured, moved, removed or introduced.
Adjustments of brightness, contrast, or color balance are acceptable if, and only as long as, they do not obscure or eliminate any
information present in the original image.
=== Page 4 ===
Nonlinear adjustments such as changes to gamma settings must be disclosed in the ﬁgure legend.
Use of AI tools to create or manipulate primary research images is not permitted. This includes images that represent experimental or
observational data, such as western blots, microscopy images, histology images, or patient images. Please read our policy on the use of AI
tools in ﬁgures, images and artwork, which can be found in Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals.
To verify compliance with the above, this journal may send your images to a secure third-party tool to enable screening for image
irregularities. Our editors may ask you to provide original data or images if any questions arise as a result of the screening. The ﬁnal decision
as to whether images are acceptable will be taken by our editors.
Authors are encouraged to carefully check all images before submission and to connect all the data in any ﬁgures to the original,
unprocessed data.
Jurisdictional claims
Elsevier respects the decisions taken by its authors as to how they choose to designate territories and identify their aﬃliations in their
published content. Elsevier’s policy is to take a neutral position with respect to territorial disputes or jurisdictional claims, including, but not
limited to, maps and institutional aﬃliations. For journals that Elsevier publishes on behalf of a third party owner, the owner may set its own
policy on these issues.
Maps: Readers should be able to locate any study areas shown within maps using common mapping platforms. Maps should only show
the area actually studied and authors should not include a location map which displays a larger area than the bounding box of the study
area. Authors should add a note clearly stating that "map lines delineate study areas and do not necessarily depict accepted national
boundaries”.  During the review process, Elsevier’s editors may request authors to change maps if these guidelines are not followed.
Institutional aﬃliations: Authors should use either the full, standard title of their institution or the standard abbreviation of the
institutional name so that the institutional name can be independently veriﬁed for research integrity purposes.
Delayed publication
If you need to delay the publication of your article for any reason, please contact the editorial oﬃce of the journal or our Journal Article
Publishing Support Center at the earliest possible opportunity. While we will try to ensure that your article is not published before a certain
date if you make your request on a timely basis, we cannot guarantee this. Please also note that once the agreed period of delay has expired
the article may be published at any time thereafter.
Withdrawal, correction, or retraction
For questions about article withdrawal, correction, or retraction, please consult Elsevier’s Article Correction, Retraction and Removal Policy.
Writing and formatting
File format
We ask you to provide editable source ﬁles for your entire submission (including ﬁgures, tables and text graphics). Some guidelines:
Save ﬁles in an editable format, using the extension .doc/.docx for Word ﬁles and .tex for LaTeX ﬁles. A PDF is not an acceptable source ﬁle.
Format Word ﬁles in a single-column layout. Double-column formatting is only permitted for LaTeX submissions.
Remove any strikethrough and underlined text from your manuscript, unless it has scientiﬁc signiﬁcance related to your article.
Use spell-check and grammar-check functions to avoid errors.
We advise you to read our Step-by-step guide to publishing with Elsevier.
Title page
You are required to include the following details on the title page:
=== Page 5 ===
Article title. Article titles should be concise and informative. Please avoid abbreviations and formulae, where possible, unless they are
established and widely understood, e.g. DNA.
Author names. Provide the given name(s) and family name(s) of each author. The order of authors should match the order in the
submission system. Carefully check that all names are accurately spelled. You may add your name between parentheses in your own script
after the English transliteration.
Aﬃliations, referring to where the work was carried out, below the author names. Indicate aﬃliations using a lower-case superscript
letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the corresponding address. Ensure that you provide the full name and postal
address of each aﬃliation, including the country name.
Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence for your article at all stages of the refereeing and publication
process and also post-publication. This responsibility includes answering any future queries about your results, data, or methodology. The
email address of the corresponding author must be included on the title page and will be published in the article.
Present/permanent address. If an author has changed aﬃliation since the work described in your article was carried out, or was visiting
during that time, a "present address" (or "permanent address") can be indicated by a footnote to the author's name. The address where
the author carried out the work must be retained as their main aﬃliation address. Use superscript Arabic numerals for such footnotes.
Abstract
You are required to provide a concise and factual abstract which does not exceed 250 words. The abstract should:
State the purpose of your paper.
Outline basic procedures followed.
Include your main ﬁndings, their statistical signiﬁcance, where applicable, and your principal conclusions.
Emphasize new and important aspects of your study or observations.
Some guidelines:
Abstracts must be able to stand alone, as abstracts are often presented separately from the article.
Avoid references. If any are essential to include, ensure that you cite the author(s) and year(s).
Avoid non-standard or uncommon abbreviations. If any are essential to include, ensure they are deﬁned within your abstract at ﬁrst
mention.
Keywords
You are required to provide 1 to 7 keywords for indexing purposes. Keywords should be written in English. Please try to avoid keywords
consisting of multiple words (using "and" or "of").
We recommend that you only use abbreviations in keywords if they are ﬁrmly established in the ﬁeld.
Highlights
You are required to provide article highlights at submission.
Highlights are a short collection of bullet points that should capture the novel results of your research as well as any new methods used
during your study. Highlights will help increase the discoverability of your article via search engines. Some guidelines:
Submit highlights as a separate editable ﬁle in the online submission system with the word "highlights" included in the ﬁle name.
Highlights should consist of 3 to 5 bullet points, each a maximum of 85 characters, including spaces.
=== Page 6 ===
We encourage you to view example article highlights and read about the beneﬁts of their inclusion.
Graphical abstract
You are required to provide a graphical abstract at submission.
The graphical abstract summarizes the contents of your article in a concise, pictorial, professional form, highlighting important aspects of the
research. It is designed to appeal to an interdisciplinary audience, and draw more attention to your online article. Some guidelines:
Ensure you have obtained the necessary permission to include any third party owned material in a graphical abstract.
Use of generative AI or AI-assisted tools in the production of graphical abstracts must align with Elsevier’s GenAI Policies for Journals.
Submit your graphical abstract as a separate ﬁle in the online submission system.
Ensure the image is 531 x 1328 pixels (h x w) or proportionally more, and is readable at a size of 5 x 13 cm.
Preferred ﬁle types for graphical abstracts are TIFF, EPS, PDF or MS Oﬃce ﬁles.
More information, examples and a template can be found in the graphical abstract guidelines.
Tables
Tables must be submitted as editable text, not as images. Some guidelines:
Place tables next to the relevant text or on a separate page(s) at the end of your article.
Cite all tables in the manuscript text.
Number tables consecutively according to their appearance in the text.
Please provide captions along with the tables.
Place any table notes below the table body.
Avoid vertical rules and shading within table cells.
We recommend that you use tables sparingly, ensuring that any data presented in tables is not duplicating results described elsewhere in the
article.
Figures, images and other artwork
Figures, images, diagrams and other graphical media (artwork) must be supplied as separate ﬁles along with the manuscript, in line with
these artwork and media instructions. Some excerpts:
When submitting artwork:
Cite all images in the manuscript text.
Number images according to the order they appear within your article.
Submit each image as a separate ﬁle using a logical naming convention for your ﬁles (for example, Figure_1, Figure_2 etc).
Text graphics may be embedded in the text at the appropriate position. If you are working with LaTeX, text graphics may also be
embedded in the ﬁle.
Captions
=== Page 7 ===
All artwork must have a caption. A caption should consist of a brief title (not displayed on the ﬁgure itself) and a description of the image.
Keep the amount of text to a minimum, though any symbol or abbreviation should be explained.
Read how to add captions to your submission here.
Formats
Submit your artwork in the formats listed below, following the given requirements:
Image type Recommended ﬁle type Requirements
Vector drawings EPS, PDF Embed the font or save text as graphics
Photographs (color or grayscale) TIFF, JPG, PNG Minimum resolution 300 dpi (min. width:
single column: 1063 pixels; full page: 2244
pixels)
Bitmapped line drawings TIFF, JPG, PNG Minimum resolution 1000 dpi (min. width:
single column: 3543 pixels; full page: 7480
pixels)
Charts and large or shaded tables XLS, XLSX Supply in a clearly readable format
Annotated images PPT, PPTX Annotations and text must be legible;
Minimum resolution of embedded images
300 dpi
Do not submit:
Files that are too low in resolution.
Artwork where text is disproportionately small compared to the image size, as text may become unreadable.
Multiple images or graphs combined into one ﬁle, as this aﬀects legibility and accessibility. An exception may be made for images that are
intended to be compared to each other, such as before, during, and after photographs.
Color artwork
If you submit usable color ﬁgures with your accepted article, we will ensure that they appear in color online. Please ensure that color images
are accessible to all, including those with impaired color vision. Learn more about color and web accessibility.
Generative AI and ﬁgures, images and other artwork
Please read our policy on the use of generative AI and AI-assisted tools in ﬁgures, images and artwork, which can be found in Elsevier’s GenAI
Policies for Journals. This policy states:
AI tools may be used to support the creation of explanatory images (such as ﬂow charts, conceptual diagrams, or schematic illustrations)
AI tools may be used to create data visualizations (such as plots, charts, graphs, or heatmaps) when the output is directly derived from
underlying data using reproducible analytical, computational, or statistical methods.
=== Page 8 ===
AI tools must not be used to create or alter images that represent primary observed or experimental data (such as western blots,
microscopy images, histology images, or patient images) that were not directly obtained in the research. This includes adjustments to
brightness, contrast, or color balance, which should only be done using established image processing software.
This policy does not prevent the use of AI tools in formal research design or research methods (such as in AI-assisted imaging approaches
used for collection and/or interpretation of the underlying research data or predictive modelling of clinical outcomes based on patient
data).
Authors are responsible for ensuring the accuracy and originality of all images submitted for publication. If you used generative AI tools to
create images in your manuscript, you should disclose this in each image caption as well as in the general Generative AI disclosure statement.
Supplementary material
We encourage the use of supplementary materials such as applications, images and sound clips to enhance research. Some guidelines:
Supplementary material should be accurate and relevant to the research.
Cite all supplementary ﬁles in the manuscript text.
Submit all supplementary materials at the same time as your manuscript.
Include a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary ﬁle, describing its content.
After submission supplementary ﬁles can only be added or replaced in the revision stage of the editorial process.
Be aware that all supplementary materials provided will appear online in the exact same way as received. These ﬁles will not be checked,
formatted or typeset by the production team.
Video
This journal accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientiﬁc research. We encourage you to include
links to video or animation ﬁles within articles. Some guidelines:
When including video or animation ﬁle links within your article, refer to the video or animation content by adding a note in your text
where the ﬁle should be placed.
Clearly label ﬁles ensuring the given ﬁle name is directly related to the ﬁle content.
Provide ﬁles in one of our recommended ﬁle formats. Files should be within our preferred maximum ﬁle size of 150 MB per ﬁle, 1 GB in
total.
Provide "stills" for each of your ﬁles. These will be used as standard icons to personalize the link to your video data. You can choose any
frame from your video or animation or make a separate image.
Provide descriptive text in your manuscript to refer to the video content. This text helps ensure accessibility for visually impaired readers
who rely on descriptive information. For journals publishing in print this is also essential, as video and animation ﬁles cannot be
embedded in the print version.
We publish all video and animation ﬁles supplied in the electronic version of your article.
For more detailed instructions, we recommend that you read our guidelines on submitting video content to be included in the body of an
article.
Research data
We are committed to supporting the storage of, access to and discovery of research data, and our research data policy sets out the principles
guiding how we work with the research community to support a more eﬃcient and transparent research process.
=== Page 9 ===
Research data refers to the results of observations or experimentation that validate research ﬁndings, which may also include software, code,
models, algorithms, protocols, methods and other useful materials related to the project.
Please read our guidelines on sharing research data for more information on depositing, sharing and using research data and other relevant
research materials.
Research data deposit, citation and linking
For this journal, Option C instructions from our research data guidelines apply. This means that you are required to:
Deposit your research data in a relevant data repository.
Cite and link to this dataset in your article.
If this is not possible, make a statement explaining why research data cannot be shared.
Data statement
To foster transparency, you are required to state the availability of any data at submission.
Ensuring data is available may be a requirement of your funding body or institution. If your data is unavailable to access or unsuitable to post,
you can state the reason why (e.g., your research data includes sensitive or conﬁdential information such as patient data) during the
submission process. This statement will appear with your published article on ScienceDirect.
Read more about the importance and beneﬁts of providing a data statement.
Data linking
Linking to the data underlying your work increases your exposure and may lead to new collaborations. It also provides readers with a better
understanding of the described research.
If your research data has been made available in a data repository there are a number of ways your article can be linked directly to the
dataset:
Provide a link to your dataset when prompted during the online submission process.
For some data repositories, a repository banner will automatically appear next to your published article on ScienceDirect.
You can also link relevant data or entities within the text of your article through the use of identiﬁers. Use the following format: Database:
12345 (e.g. TAIR: AT1G01020; CCDC: 734053; PDB: 1XFN).
Learn more about linking research data and research articles in ScienceDirect.
Mendeley data
This journal supports Mendeley Data, enabling you to deposit any research data (including raw and processed data, video, code, software,
algorithms, protocols and methods) associated with your manuscript in a free-to-use, open access repository.
Before or during the submission process, you can deposit the relevant datasets to Mendeley Data. Please include the DOI of the deposited
dataset(s) in your main manuscript ﬁle.
The datasets will be listed and directly accessible to readers next to your published article online.
Learn more about Mendeley Data for journals.
Co-submission of related data, methods or protocols
You are encouraged to publish a description of your research data, methods, or protocols related to your regular article as a co-submission
article in Data in Brief or MethodsX.
=== Page 10 ===
This co-submission can be submitted at the same time as your regular manuscript submission to this journal. If both your regular and co-
submitted manuscripts are accepted for publication, they will be linked together on ScienceDirect, thereby promoting research
reproducibility, interoperability, and open science.
Prepare a separate manuscript describing your research data, methods, or protocols using the mandatory templates from Data in Brief or
MethodsX.
Submit this co-submission alongside your regular manuscript as a separate submission item; on the ‘Attach ﬁles’ page in Editorial
Manager, after which it will be automatically forwarded to the Data in Brief or MethodsX and assigned an editor.
For associated Article Processing Charge (APC) details, please visit:
MethodsX
Data in Brief
Please note: Due to the automated process of submitting to Data in Brief or MethodsX, only after acceptance will you be presented with a
personalized OA Article Publishing Charge based on your individual context (your country, institutional aﬃliation, and any society
membership for example).
Please visit the co-submission Researcher Support page for more information on how to submit a co-submission.
Article structure
Article sections
Divide your manuscript into clearly deﬁned and numbered sections. Number subsections 1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), then 1.2, etc.
Use the numbering format when cross-referencing within your article. Do not just refer to "the text."
You may give subsections a brief heading. Headings should appear on a separate line.
Do not include the article abstract within section numbering.
Acknowledgements
Include any individuals who provided you with help during your research, such as help with language, writing or proof reading, in the
acknowledgements section.
Acknowledgements should be placed in a separate section which appears directly before the reference list. Do not include acknowledgements
on your title page, as a footnote to your title, or anywhere else in your article other than in the separate acknowledgements section.
Author contributions: CRediT
Corresponding authors are required to acknowledge co-author contributions using CRediT (Contributor Roles Taxonomy) roles:
Conceptualization
Data curation
Formal analysis
Funding acquisition
Investigation
Methodology